---
title: Cause
author: Team
categories: [Blogging, Demo]
tags: [typography]
math: true
---

## Cause


Messaging and mobile calls have become the major means of communication these days, and almost everyone owns a smartphone. A survey shows that over 500 million Indians use smartphones among which 77% of users are online.

Given the current trend, old people are also forced to shift towards using mobile phones and messaging apps to stay in touch with their loved ones. It is well-known that most of the older generation have innate difficulty in understanding and operating the complex functionalities of smartphones.
We pursued this problem and talked to some older people to find out what causes difficulty for them to operate smartphones. Some of the common causes we found are:

#### *1. Endless functions in the smartphone nowadays:* 

 Today, there are endless applications and functions on a smartphone. Even the current generation doesn’t know about each and every function, then for the elder people it becomes a worse condition as they make use of only 3-4 applications in mobile phones. They might not remember concepts even if they were taught many times due to weak memory.

#### *2. English as the Default language:*

 One major problem with smartphones is that they use English by default, be it the keyboard used for typing messages or the settings and the general instructions. The older people are not familiar with words such as ‘edit’, ‘registration’, etc. And even though some smartphones have the feature to change their default language, it is not very accessible. This is difficult for the elderly who have only ever conversed in their native language.

#### *3. Font size issues due to weak eyesight:*

For the elderly, the font size in smartphones is again a very critical problem. The elderly face problems in viewing the text on the already smaller screens, and thus focusing on this small text leads to massive strain on the eyes and headaches.

#### *4. Difficulty in typing messages:*

WhatsApp has become a common mode of communication nowadays. Around 1.3 billion people in the world use this app on a regular basis, but this can be taxing for the elderly. Elders are not used to this skill of typing messages for communication. They are not able to press where they aimed, their finger slips after touching the screen, and they touch the screen for a long time. As a result, they have problems navigating on smartphone screens. Also, they then take a lot of time in typing which kills the flow of messaging sometimes.

#### *5. Dependent on others:*

Since there are a lot of functionalities in smartphones now, most of which elders are unaware of, due to which they are also sometimes afraid to operate their mobiles. And thus, they generally intend to take help from others to use mobile phones which makes them dependent on others and creates a problem for them when they are alone.

#### *6. Not knowing the basic app features:*

 Elders use smartphones for calling most of the time. But they don’t know the basic feature of saving the contact number, since it is a comparatively longer process than simply writing it in a diary. This again is a major problem for the elders since they are dependent on the diary for finding the contacts which takes a lot of time in searching the contact in the diary and can lead to major problems if any page of the diary is lost or even if the diary is lost. Also, they always have to keep a pen along with them for this, and thus, keeping the diary and a pen in one place creates problems.

#### *7. Cannot remember login information:*

The elderly are not able to remember the login information and the account they use for each service, for example, account ID, Google account, or even the password. This causes problems when logging in