---
title: Context
author: Team
math: true
---

The problem of increased use of technology has influenced every person in the world. However, this digital world has led to an enormous use of smartphones these days, which has adversely affected the older generation who do not know about the technical things that are getting complicated day-by-day. 

This problem has led the elders to depend on their family members or the younger generation, due to which they face difficulties while they are alone. The problem is mainly faced by elder people living alone or whose family members work from morning to night, i.e., who remain alone for a maximum time as they have no one who can help them in figuring out how the mobile phones work. 

Mobile phones contain many apps that are not used by the elderly. They mainly use mobile phones at the time of calling. The main applications that are used by the elderly are - Phone (calling), Contact, Calculator, Camera, and sometimes WhatsApp.

Additional problems that are faced by the elderly we identified are listed below:

### English as the Default language

One major problem with smartphones is that they use English by default, be it the keyboard for typing messages or the settings and the general instructions. Older people are not familiar with words such as ‘edit,’ ‘registration,’ etc. And even though some smartphones have the feature to change their default language, it is not very accessible. This is difficult for the elderly who have only ever conversed in their native language.

### Font size issues due to weak eyesight

For the elderly, the font size in smartphones is again a very critical problem. The elderly face problems in viewing the text on the already smaller screens, and thus focusing on this short text leads to massive strain on the eyes and headaches.

### Difficulty in typing messages

WhatsApp has become a common mode of communication nowadays. Elders are not used to this skill of typing messages for communication. They are not able to press where they aimed, their finger slips after touching the screen, or they touch the screen for a long time. They then take much time in typing, which kills the flow of messaging sometimes.

### Dependent on others

Since there are many functionalities in smartphones now, most of which elders are unaware of, they are also sometimes afraid to operate their mobiles. And thus, they generally intend to take help from others to use mobile phones, which makes them dependent on others and creates a problem for them when they are living alone.

### Not knowing the basic phone features

Elders use smartphones for calling most of the time. But they don’t know the primary features of mobiles like saving the contact number since it is a comparatively longer process than simply writing it in a diary. This is a significant problem faced by the elderly since they are dependent on the diary for finding the contacts, which takes much time searching the contact in the diary and can lead to significant problems if any page of the diary is torn/lost or even if the diary is lost. Also, they always have to keep a pen along with them for noting down the contact information.

### Cannot remember login information

The elderly are unable to remember the login information and the account they use for each service, for example, account ID, Google account, or even the password, which causes problems at the time of logging in.
 
Many app launchers like Blocc Ratio, LessPhone, Niagara Launcher are present, but these are not focused on older people, and there is no single app launcher that is primarily focused on the elderly. The Pros and Cons of these app launchers are:

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Name</th>
    <th>Pros</th>
    <th>Cons</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Blocc Ratio</td>
    <td>
      <ul>
        <li>Auto-categorization of apps</li>
        <li>Favorite apps are displayed on the home screen (According to usage)</li>
        <li>Fantastic Design</li>
        <li>Different themes available</li>
      </ul>
    </td>
    <td>
      <ul>
        <li>The language setting is not available</li>
        <li>The dashboard has too many features not used by elderlies</li>
        <li>Not minimalistic</li>
        <li>Favorite Apps cannot be changed</li>
      </ul>
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>LessPhone</td>
    <td>
      <ul>
        <li>Can add some favourite apps</li>
        <li>Text-Based Launcher</li>
        <li>Font Size can be changed</li>
        <li>Theme can be changed</li>
      </ul>
    </td>
    <td>
      <ul>
        <li>Pay to change theme or add more than 3 favourite apps</li>
        <li>Too restraining more useful for those looking to reduce daily phone usage</li>
      </ul>
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Niagara Launcher</td>
    <td>
      <ul>
        <li>Single Screen Launcher</li>
        <li>Interact with notifications from the home screen</li>
        <li>Simplified List of Apps</li>
        <li>8 favorite apps can be added to the home screen</li>
      </ul>
    </td>
    <td>
      <ul>
        <li>Still in development, only early access available</li>
        <li>Doesn’t support widgets(Like analog clock, etc.)</li>
      </ul>
    </td>
  </tr>
</table>